# FlightPlanning

Flight delays are very common and became exasperated by the pandemic in recent years. For passengers, flight delays often mean scheduling problems such as missing connecting flights or missing a ride from the destination airport to a passenger's hotel or home. Airlines are required to notify passengers of a delay within 30 minutes of learning of a status change. However, there is still a lot of variability in when airlines announce these delays and often times it happens less than an hour before the flight's scheduled departure time. Our model will allow passengers to consistently have awareness of any potential delay 2 hours prior to their estimated departure time, allowing passengers time to make alternate plans as needed such as finding another connecting flight or giving their ride notice that they will likely be delayed. But what is a flight delay exactly? The FAA defines a flight as delayed if it takes off or lands more than 15 minutes later than scheduled. However, flights that take off 15 minutes late can often still arrive on time as pilots are frequently able to make up for a 15 minute delay in the air. Additionally, even if a pilot is unable to make up for the 15 minute delay in the air, arriving 15 minutes late often has minimal impact on passengers. Often times, passengers give themselves at least a 15 minute buffer when making transportation plans or scheduling connecting flights given how common it is to experience this type of delay. A 30 minute arrival delay is more likely to have meaningful, negative impact on a passenger's schedule. The shortest layover between connecting domestic flights that passeneger's will schedule is ~30 minutes. This means if their first flight arrives 30 minutes late, they will not have any chance of making their connection. Airlines also recognize the impact of a 30 minute delay is this the minimum threshold that requires airlines to update all flight status displays with the delay. Thus, our model will predict ~2 hours prior to a flight's estimated departure whether or not the flight will arrive more than 30 minutes late. This will allow passengers to consistently have awareness of an impactful delay and adjust their flight connections or other scheduled transportation accordingly.
